# Exercise 1.10

The following procedure computes a mathematical function called Ackermann’s
function.

```scheme
(define (A x y)
  (cond ((= y 0) 0)
        ((= x 0) (* 2 y))
        ((= y 1) 2)
        (else (A (- x 1)
                 (A x (- y 1))))))
```

What are the values of the following expressions?

```scheme
(A 1 10)
(A 2 4)
(A 3 3)
```

Consider the following procedures, where `A` is the procedure defined above:

```scheme
(define (f n) (A 0 n))
(define (g n) (A 1 n))
(define (h n) (A 2 n))
(define (k n) (* 5 n n))
```

Give concise mathematical definitions for the functions computed by the
procedures `f`, `g`, and `h` for positive integer values of `n`. For example,
`(k n)` computes $5n^2$.

## Answer

```scheme
(A 1 10)
> 1024
(A 2 4)
> 65536
(A 3 3)
> 65536
```

To analyze those $f$, $g$ and $h$ functions, we should try to understand how $A$
works mathematically.

$$
A(x, y) =
\begin{cases}
2y & \text{if } x = 0 \\
0  & \text{if } y = 0 \\
A(x-1, A(y-1))
\end{cases}
\qquad
\forall x \ge 0, y \ge 0
$$

It's easy to see $f(n) = A(0, n) = 2n$.

Since $g = A(1, n)$, only the 1st and 3rd branch of $A$ is used. Thus

$$
\begin{split}
g(n) &= A(1, n) \\
     &= A(0, A(1, n-1)) \\
     &= 2 \cdot A(1, n-1)) \\
     &= 2^2 \cdot A(1, n-2)) \\
     &= \dots \\
     &= 2^n
\end{split}
$$

Finally, we compute $h(n)$ base on $g(n)$.

$$
\forall n \gt 0 \qquad
\begin{split}
h(n) &= A(2, n) \\
     &= A(1, A(2, n-1)) \\
     &= g(A(2, n-1)) \\
     &= g(h(n-1)) \\
     &= 2^{h(n-1)} \\
     &= 2^{2^{h(n-2)}} \\
     &= 2^{2^{2^{\dots}}}       &(n \text{ times}) \\
     &= 2^{2\uparrow\uparrow n} &(\text{ or } {^{n}2})
\end{split}
$$

If $n \gt 0$, and $h(0) = 0$, otherwise, $h(n)$ is a
[tetration](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tetration) of $2$. The weird edge case
of $n = 0$ make $h(n)$ a bit less beautiful, though.

See [`./1.10.ackermann.rkt`](./1.10.ackermann.rkt) for the `tetration`
implemtation.

## Misc

Some notes about [Ackermann function][ack_fn] and related concepts:

[ack_fn]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ackermann_function

- **Ackermann function**:

  - One of the simplest and earliest-discovered examples of a total computable
    function that is not primitive recursive.
  - All primitive recursive functions are _total_ and _computable_, but the
    Ackermann function illustrates that not all total computable functions are
    primitive recursive.

- **Computable function**:

  - The formalized analogue of the intuitive notion of algorithms,
  - There exists an algorithm that can do the job of the function

- **Primitive recursive function**:

  - Can be computed using all `for` loops (an upper bound of the number of
    iterations of every loop is fixed before entering the loop).
  - A strict subset of those general recursive functions that are also total
    functions.
  - For showing that a computable function is primitive recursive, it suffices
    to show that _its time complexity is bounded above by a primitive recursive
    function of the **input size**_.

- **Partial function**: a function $f$ from a subset $S$ of $X$ to $Y$.

  - $f: S \rightarrow Y \mid S \subseteq X$
  - $S$ is called the _domain of definition_, or _natural domain_ or $f$.
  - If $S = X$, $f$ is called a **total function**.
