# Exercise 1.37

1. An infinite _continued fraction_ is an expression of the form

   $$
   f = \frac{N_1}{
   D_1 + \frac{N_2}{
   D_2 + \frac{N_3}{
   D_3 + \ldots
   }}}
   $$

   As an example, one can show that the infinite continued fraction expansion
   with the $N_i$ and the $D_i$ all equal to 1 produces $1/\varphi$, where
   $\varphi$ is the golden ratio (described in 1.2.2). One way to approximate an
   infinite continued fraction is to truncate the expansion after a given number
   of terms. Such a truncation—a so-called finite continued fraction $k$-term
   _finite continued fraction_—has the form

   $$
   \frac{N_1}{
   D_1 + \frac{N_2}{
   \ddots + \frac{N_k}{
   D_k
   }}}
   $$

   Suppose that $n$ and $d$ are procedures of one argument (the term index $i$)
   that return the $N_i$ and $D_i$ of the terms of the continued fraction.
   Define a procedure `cont-frac` such that evaluating `(cont-frac n d k)`
   computes the value of the $k$-term finite continued fraction. Check your
   procedure by approximating $1/\varphi$ using

   ```scheme
   (cont-frac (lambda (i) 1.0)
              (lambda (i) 1.0)
              k)
   ```

   for successive values of $k$. How large must you make $k$ in order to get an
   approximation that is accurate to 4 decimal places?

2. If your `cont-frac` procedure generates a recursive process, write one that
   generates an iterative process. If it generates an iterative process, write
   one that generates a recursive process.

## Answer

> one can show that the infinite continued fraction expansion with the $N_i$ and
> the $D_i$ all equal to 1 produces $1/\varphi$, where $\varphi$ is the golden
> ratio (described in 1.2.2).

Let's prove it! We define call the $k$-term finite continued fraction where
$N_i$ and $D_i$ are 1 as $f_k$. Thus,

$$
f_{k+1} = \frac{1}{
1 + \frac{1}{
\ddots + 1
}} = \frac{1}{1 + f_k}
$$

We can prove that $f_n = \frac{Fib_n}{Fib_{n+1}}$ for $n \ge 1$. That lemma is
correct with $n = 1$, since $f_1 = 1 = \frac{Fib_1}{Fib_2}$ (recall that $Fib_n$
is 0, 1, 1, 2, ... with $n$ start from 0). Then, for $n \gt 1$,

$$
\begin{split}
f_{n+1} &= \frac{1}{1 + f_n} \\
        &= \frac{1}{1 + \frac{Fib_n}{Fib_{n+1}}} \\
        &= \frac{Fib_{n+1}}{Fib_{n+1} + Fib_n} \\
        &= \frac{Fib_{n+1}}{Fib_{n+2}} \\
\end{split}
$$

So, we prove the relationship between $f_n$ and Fibonacci sequence. By applying
the closest-from of $Fib_n$, we will have

$$
f_n = \frac{\varphi^n − \psi^n}{\varphi^{n+1} − \psi^{n+1}}
$$

Knowing the value of $\varphi$ and $\psi$, we can quickly see that

$$
\begin{split}
\lim_{n\to\infty} f_n &=
\lim_{n\to\infty} \frac{\varphi^n − \psi^n}{\varphi^{n+1} − \psi^{n+1}} \\
&= \lim_{n\to\infty} \frac{\varphi^n}{\varphi^{n+1}} \\
&= \frac{1}{\varphi} \\
\end{split}
$$

> Define a procedure `cont-frac`...

See `cont-frac` and `cont-frac-rec` in
[`./higher-order-procedures.rkt`](./higher-order-procedures.rkt)

> How large must you make $k$ in order to get an approximation that is accurate
> to 4 decimal places?

From the actual result, we need to $k=12$ to have the correct first 4 decimal
places ($k=11$ is still wrong after rounding up).

| $k$    | Result                 |
| ------ | ---------------------- |
| 0      | 0.0                    |
| 1      | 1.0                    |
| 2      | 0.5                    |
| 3      | 0.6666666666666666     |
| 4      | 0.6000000000000001     |
| 5      | 0.625                  |
| 6      | 0.6153846153846154     |
| 7      | 0.6190476190476191     |
| 8      | 0.6176470588235294     |
| 9      | 0.6181818181818182     |
| 10     | 0.6179775280898876     |
| 11     | 0.6180555555555556     |
| **12** | **0.6180257510729613** |
| 13     | 0.6180371352785146     |
| 14     | 0.6180327868852459     |
| 15     | 0.6180344478216819     |
| 16     | 0.6180338134001252     |
| 17     | 0.6180340557275542     |
| 18     | 0.6180339631667064     |
| 19     | 0.6180339985218034     |
