# Exercise 1.7

The `good-enough?` test used in computing square roots will not be very effective
for finding the square roots of very small numbers. Also, in real computers,
arithmetic operations are almost always performed with limited precision. This
makes our test inadequate for very large numbers. Explain these statements, with
examples showing how the test fails for small and large numbers. An alternative
strategy for implementing `good-enough?` is to watch how guess changes from one
iteration to the next and to stop when the change is a very small fraction of
the guess. Design a square-root procedure that uses this kind of end test. Does
this work better for small and large numbers?

## Answer

> The `good-enough?` test used in computing square roots will not be very
> effective for finding the square roots of very small numbers.

`good-enough?` relying on a predefined _small_ `epsilon` number. If the radicand
is even smaller than `epsilon`, `good-enough?` will always return true, no
matter what `guess` is. Thus, the `sqrt` procedure will not return a good
result.

> ... arithmetic operations are almost always performed with limited
> precision... our test inadequate for very large numbers.

**My guess**

Computer stores number in bits, which can only represent floating-point numbers
approximately. Hence, `good-enough?` that relies on `epsilon` might not be
meaningful when compare really large floating-point `guess`. The `sqrt`
procedure might be very slow or even run indefinitely.

```racket
(exact->inexact (sqrt 10000000000000000))
```

> Design a square-root procedure that uses this kind of end test (watch how
> guess change).

See `sqrt-v2` in [`./sqrt.rkt`](./sqrt.rkt). I had to handle 0 explicitly in the
`sqrt-v2` procedure because my `good-enough-v2?` leads to infinite loop.

See all the extensive discussion on this exercise [here][wiki-1.7]

[wiki-1.7]: http://community.schemewiki.org/?sicp-ex-1.7
