# Exercise 2.29

A binary mobile consists of two branches, a left branch and a right branch. Each
branch is a rod of a certain length, from which hangs either a weight or another
binary mobile. We can represent a binary mobile using compound data by
constructing it from two branches (for example, using `list`):

```scheme
(define (make-mobile left right)
  (list left right))
```

A branch is constructed from a `length` (which must be a number) together with a
`structure`, which may be either a number (representing a simple weight) or
another mobile:

```scheme
(define (make-branch length structure)
  (list length structure))
```

1. Write the corresponding selectors `left-branch` and `right-branch`, which
   return the branches of a mobile, and `branch-length` and `branch-structure`,
   which return the components of a branch.
2. Using your selectors, define a procedure `total-weight` that returns the
   total weight of a mobile.
3. A mobile is said to be _balanced_ if the torque applied by its top-left
   branch is equal to that applied by its top-right branch (that is, if the
   length of the left rod multiplied by the weight hanging from that rod is
   equal to the corresponding product for the right side) and if each of the
   submobiles hanging off its branches is balanced. Design a predicate that
   tests whether a binary mobile is balanced.
4. Suppose we change the representation of mobiles so that the constructors are

   ```scheme
   (define (make-mobile left right)
     (cons left right))

   (define (make-branch length structure)
     (cons length structure))
   ```

   How much do you need to change your programs to convert to the new
   representation?

   ## Note

   Like me, someone asked about what does "mobile" mean in 1983.

   https://ell.stackexchange.com/a/234182

   It's balancing toy, a type of sculpture.

   This is a great exercise to reinforce the important of data abstraction.

   ## Answer

   [`./2.29.mobile.rkt`](./2.29.mobile.rkt)
