# Exercise 2.42

The “eight-queens puzzle” asks how to place eight queens on a chessboard so that
no queen is in check from any other (i.e., no two queens are in the same row,
column, or diagonal). One possible solution is shown in Figure 2.8.

One way to solve the puzzle is to work across the board, placing a queen in each
column. Once we have placed $k−1$ queens, we must place the $k^{th}$ queen in a
position where it does not check any of the queens already on the board.

We can formulate this approach recursively: Assume that we have already
generated the sequence of all possible ways to place $k−1$ queens in the first
$k−1$ columns of the board. For each of these ways, generate an extended set of
positions by placing a queen in each row of the $k^{th}$ column. Now filter
these, keeping only the positions for which the queen in the $k^{th}$ column is
safe with respect to the other queens. This produces the sequence of all ways to
place $k$ queens in the first $k$ columns. By continuing this process, we will
produce not only one solution, but all solutions to the puzzle.

<figure>
  <img src="https://sarabander.github.io/sicp/html/fig/chap2/Fig2.8c.std.svg" alt="">
  <figcaption><strong>Figure 2.8</strong>: A solution to the eight-queens puzzle.</figcaption>
</figure>

We implement this solution as a procedure `queens`, which returns a sequence of
all solutions to the problem of placing $n$ queens on an $n×n$ chessboard.
`queens` has an internal procedure `queen-cols` that returns the sequence of all
ways to place queens in the first $k$ columns of the board.

```scheme
(define (queens board-size)
  (define (queen-cols k)
    (if (= k 0)
        (list empty-board)
        (filter
         (lambda (positions)
           (safe? k positions))
         (flatmap
          (lambda (rest-of-queens)
            (map (lambda (new-row)
                   (adjoin-position
                    new-row
                    k
                    rest-of-queens))
                 (enumerate-interval
                  1
                  board-size)))
          (queen-cols (- k 1))))))
  (queen-cols board-size))
```

In this procedure `rest-of-queens` is a way to place $k−1$ queens in the first
$k−1$ columns, and `new-row` is a proposed row in which to place the queen for
the $k^{th}$ column.

Complete the program by implementing the representation for sets of board
positions, including the procedure `adjoin-position`, which adjoins a new
row-column position to a set of positions, and `empty-board`, which represents
an empty set of positions. You must also write the procedure `safe?`, which
determines for a set of positions, whether the queen in the $k^{th}$ column is
safe with respect to the others. (Note that we need only check whether the new
queen is safe — the other queens are already guaranteed safe with respect to
each other.)

## Answer

I tried to solve the puzzle before solving the exercise. My 1st attempt is quite
inelegant compare to the one in the book.

Check [`./2.42.queens.rkt`](./2.42.queens.rkt) for the 2 solutions, some
analysis and related code to visualize the boards.
