# Exercise 2.58

Suppose we want to modify the differentiation program so that it works with
ordinary mathematical notation, in which `+` and `*` are infix rather than
prefix operators.

Since the differentiation program is defined in terms of abstract data, we can
modify it to work with different representations of expressions solely by
changing the predicates, selectors, and constructors that define the
representation of the algebraic expressions on which the differentiator is to
operate.

1. Show how to do this in order to differentiate algebraic expressions presented
   in infix form, such as `(x + (3 * (x + (y + 2))))`. To simplify the task,
   assume that `-` and `*` always take two arguments and that expressions are
   fully parenthesized.
2. The problem becomes substantially harder if we allow standard algebraic
   notation, such as `(x + 3 * (x + y + 2))`, which drops unnecessary
   parentheses and assumes that multiplication is done before addition. Can you
   design appropriate predicates, selectors, and constructors for this notation
   such that our derivative program still works?

## Answer

This is a real challenge! Below are my plan to work on this.

- Pretty printing our expression as $\LaTeX$ snippet, so that we can:

  - Verify the result visually easier (I still can't parse parentheses quickly).
  - Work with half of the (1) problem: turn prefix notation (at data structure
    level) to infix notation (when printing).

- Simply our result further. Current output is pretty ugly.

  ```scheme
  (deriv '(+ (^ x 3) (^ x 2) x) 'x)
  > '(+ (* (^ x 3) (* 3 (/ 1 x))) (+ (* (^ x 2) (* 2 (/ 1 x))) 1))
  ```

- Work on (1): rely on parentheses to separate the terms.
- Work on (2): deal with [order of operations][op-order]

[op-order]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Order_of_operations

## Pretty print

There are quite a few nuances:

- **When to insert operator symbol?**

  We want `$\cdot$` (multiplication operator) to appear in $1\cdot 2\cdot 3$,
  but we don't want it apears in $(x+1)(x+2)yz$. This is only a problem with
  multiplication. We can't omit $+$ in $1+2$, other operator has different
  appearance.

- **When to surround with parentheses?**

  Take this expression for example `(^ (+ x 1) (+ x 2))`. We want to render it
  as $(x+1)^{x+2}$, instead of any of these:

  - $x+1^{x+2}$: misleading
  - $(x+1)^{(x+2)}$: unnecessary wrapping in the power part.
  - $((x+1)^{(x+2)})$: too much

  Parentheses are used to elevate the priority of the weaker operation. So we
  will need to have a priority mapping for our operators. Then, when printing
  the expression, we will wrap sub expression if the child operator than the
  parent operator. If there no child operator, i.e. expression's terms are
  either variables or constants, no need to wrap.

The result after implement above rule look quite good. Below show the
expressions, their derivative and their rendered output:

- Expression

  ```scheme
  (^ (+ x 1) (+ x 2))
  ```

  Derivative

  ```scheme
  (* (^ (+ x 1) (+ x 2)) (+ (* (+ x 2) (/ 1 (+ x 1))) (ln (+ x 1))))
  ```

  $$
  \frac{d}{dx} \left(x + 1\right)^{x + 2} = \left(x + 1\right)^{x + 2}\left(\left(x + 2\right)\frac{1}{x + 1} + ln\left(x + 1\right)\right)
  $$

- Expression

  ```scheme
  (/ (^ x 2) (+ x 1))
  ```

  Derivative

  ```scheme
  (/ (+ (* (+ x 1) (* (^ x 2) (* 2 (/ 1 x)))) (* -1 (^ x 2))) (^ (+ x 1) 2))
  ```

  $$
  \frac{d}{dx} \frac{x^{2}}{x + 1} = \frac{\left(x + 1\right)x^{2}2\frac{1}{x} + -1x^{2}}{\left(x + 1\right)^{2}}
  $$

For the logic, see `fmt-latex` in
[`./symbolic-differentiation.rkt`](./symbolic-differentiation.rkt).

## Simplify result and code

<details >
  <summary>Ideas</summary>

Above result give us some idea to further simplify our expression
representation.

- For multiplication, move all constants to the left side, i.e. sort its terms
  so that constants come before variables or sub expression.

- Apply math rules to reduce expression complexity

  - Introduce substraction, so that $x + -1x^2$ can be just $x - x^2$
  - Combine operators that have inverse semantic. E.g.
    - Multiplication and Division: $x^2 \frac{1}{x}$ should be $x$.
    - Addition and Substraction: $x - x$ should be $0$.

2nd idea leads to the need for a procedure like `(simplify exp)`. Unlike the
simple rules like add with zero, multiply with 1, `simplify` needs to work with
multiple operators, we can't implement its logic within our selectors and
constructors. Hence, it would sit in the middle layer between our primitives
(selectors and constructors) and those high level manipulators (`deriv`,
`fmt-latex`).

</details>

I've tried to implement the above ideas, but ultimately give up. It's hard. I
don't have enough knowledge in Scheme yet to implement my ideas, and I don't
want to stuck here. Below are the partial result.

$$
\frac{d}{dx} \left(x + 1\right)^{x + 2} = \left(x + 1\right)^{x + 2}\left(\frac{x + 2}{x + 1} + ln\left(x + 1\right)\right)
$$

$$
\frac{d}{dx} \frac{x^{2}}{x + 1} = \frac{\frac{2x^{2}\left(x + 1\right)}{x} + -1x^{2}}{\left(x + 1\right)^{2}}
$$

> TODO (tai): complete the symbolic math program
