# Exercise 2.15

Eva Lu Ator, another user, has also noticed the different intervals computed by
different but algebraically equivalent expressions. She says that a formula to
compute with intervals using Alyssa’s system will produce tighter error bounds
if it can be written in such a form that no variable that represents an
uncertain number is repeated. Thus, she says, `par2` is a "better" program for
parallel resistances than `par1`. Is she right? Why?

## Answer

To understand which one is better, we need to understand the purpose,
applications of Interval Arithmetic, and what do $A+B$ and $AB$ means, provided
that $A$ and $B$ are intervals.

Let's say we have $r_1$ and $r_2$ such that

- $a \le r_1 \le b \iff r_1 \in [a, b] \equiv R_1$
- $c \le r_2 \le d \iff r_2 \in [c, d] \equiv R_2$

We don't know _exactly_ the value of $r_1$ and $r_2$, and, we need to _estimate_
the interval of a combination of them (e.g. $r_1 \pm r_2$ of $r_1 r_2$). That's
where the Interval Arithmetic is applied.

The formula

$$
par1(R_1, R_2) = \frac{R_1 R_2}{R_1 + R_2}
$$

denotes the intervals of the value computed from

$$
\frac{r_1 r_2}{r_1 + r_2}
$$

Because $r_1$ and $r_2$ are _number_ (not an interval), we can apply typical
transformation and have

$$
f(r_1, r_2) = \frac{r_1 r_2}{r_1 + r_2} = \frac{1}{\frac{1}{r_1} + \frac{1}{r_2}} \tag{1}
$$

However, as show in [Exercise 2.14](./2.14.md), we can't do such transformations
in Interval Arithmetic.

$$
par1(R_1, R_2) = \frac{R_1 R_2}{R_1 + R_2} = \left[\frac{ac}{b+d}, \frac{bd}{a+c}\right]
$$

$$
par2(R_1, R_2) = \frac{1}{\frac{1}{R_1} + \frac{1}{R_2}} =
\left[ \frac{ac}{a+c}, \frac{bd}{b+d} \right]
$$

It's because there's no concept of **identity** in the Interval Arithmetic
system ($\frac{A}{A} \ne 1$).

To see which formula is more correct, we will reuse the example in the answer
for [Exercise 2.14](./2.14.md).

```scheme
(define x (make-interval 1 3)) ; a = 1, b = 3
(define y (make-interval 1 5)) ; c = 1; d = 5

(par1 x y)
> (1/8 . 15/2)
(par2 x y)
> (1/2 . 15/8)
```

By directly compute $f(r_1, r_2)$ with actual numbers in those intervals, we
will have $f(1,1) = \frac{1}{2}$ and $f(3, 5) = \frac{15}{8}$. It's clear that
$par2$ produces much better result.

So, **Eva is right**. But, why?

Why

> a formula ... written in such a form that **no variable that represents an
> uncertain number is repeated**.

is required ?

I can't give a rigorous proof for answering above question. I can only show the
intuition, by comparing the the **different meanings** between $X^2 + X$ and
$X^2 + Y$ where both $X$ and $Y$ has same value.

- $X^2 + Y$ means the range of all the posible value of $x^2 + y$, where
  $x \in X$, $y \in Y$. $x$ and $y$ are independent, they **can have different
  value as the same time**.
- $X^2 + X$ means the range of $x^2 + x$. The variable $x$ can't have different
  value at the same time.

That's why the correct formula much not have repeated variable. This is the
[Dependency problem][dep].

> If an interval occurs several times in a calculation using parameters, and
> **each occurrence is taken independently**, then this can **lead to an
> unwanted expansion** of the resulting intervals.

[dep]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interval_arithmetic#Dependency_problem
