# Exercise 2.6

In case representing pairs as procedures wasn't mind-boggling enough, consider
that, in a language that can manipulate procedures, we can get by without
numbers (at least insofar as non-negative integers are concerned) by implementing
0 and the operation of adding 1 as

```scheme
(define zero (lambda (f) (lambda (x) x)))

(define (add-1 n)
  (lambda (f) (lambda (x) (f ((n f) x)))))
```

This representation is known as _Church numerals_, after its inventor, Alonzo
Church, the logician who invented the $\lambda$-calculus.

Define `one` and `two` directly (not in terms of `zero` and `add-1`). (Hint: Use
substitution to evaluate `(add-1 zero)`). Give a direct definition of the
addition procedure `+` (not in terms of repeated application of `add-1`).

## Answer

### `one`, `two` and `plus`

We know that `zero` is a function which take a function and return yet another
function. Let's first see what is `(zero f)`

```scheme
(zero f)

(lambda (x) x)
```

So `(zero f)` will just return an identity function, no matter whatever `f` is.
With that knowledge, applying the substitution model to `add-1`, we will have:

```scheme
(add-1 zero)

(lambda (f)
  (lambda (x)
    (f
      ((zero f)
        x))))

(lambda (f)
  (lambda (x)
    (f
      ((lambda (y) y)
        x))))

(lambda (f)
  (lambda (x)
    (f x)))
```

So, _applying_ `add-1` to `zero` creates a function that

- Take an _unknown_ function $f$, then
- Return another function that
  - Take a _value_ $x$, and
  - Apply $f$ to $x$ exactly **one** time.

Combine this with the knowledge about `zero` (a _function_ that applies
**nothing** to the given value $x$), we can see how number are defined in
_Church numerals_: it's the **amount of applications of $f$** (whatever it is)
to $x$ (again, whatever it is).

Assume that our intuition is correct, we can directly define `one` and `two` as:

```scheme
(define one
  (lambda (f)
    (lambda (x)
      (f x)))) ; applying f once

(define two
  (lambda (f)
    (lambda (x)
      (f (f x))))) ; applying f twice.
```

Let's use substitution model to verify our guess with `two`, by applying `add-1`
to `one`

```scheme
(add-1 one)

(lambda (f)
  (lambda (x)
    (f ((one f) x))))

(lambda (f)
  (lambda (x)
    (f
      ((lambda (x) (f x)) x))))

(lambda (f)
  (lambda (x)
    (f (f x))))
```

It is correct! The next step is to define `plus` (i.e, `+`). Since the notion of
number in this Church's system is the _amount of applications_ of $f$. We know
that `(plus a b)` is $f^{a+b}(x)$, here $f^n = f(f(...f(x)))$ (repeated
applications), and not $(f(x))^n$ (exponent)

```scheme
(define (plus a b)
  (lambda (f)
    (lambda (x)
      ((a f) ((b f) x)))))
```

### Tips

Honestly, thinking in terms of $\lambda$-calculus is quite difficult, because:

- Both $f$ and $x$ are _abstractions_, not some concrete, primitive things.
- This numeral system is weird. I heard about $\lambda$-calculus before, but I
  haven't learned it, and don't get its usefulness (at least for now, at this
  point in the book).
- Expressing those abstractions via Lisp (and manually parsing parentheses,
  evaluate those expressions with multiple layer of lambdas) is pure really
  annoying.

I need some notations to help me overcome the next (personal) challenges, which
is defining `mult` ($a \times b$), `pow` ($a^b$), `sub` ($a-b$), `factorial`
($a!$) ... Admittedly, I did skim through the Wikipedia article on
[$\lambda$-calculus][lambda-calculus] and know that it's possible to define
those functions.

I didn't parse those $\lambda$ expressions (so that I can have fun with this
mind game). To make the designing easier, from now on, we will use these
notations

$$
\begin{split}
     & one       &: f \mapsto x \mapsto f(x) \\
\iff & one(f)    &: x \mapsto f(x) \\
\iff & one(f)(x) &= f(x)
\end{split}
$$

The first line denotes $one$ as a function that take a function $f$, and, return
a function that take an $x$, then return $f(x)$. This can be defined in Lisp
like above. If you rater read pseudocode:

```go
func one(func f) {
  return func(x) {
    return f(x)
  }
}
```

Then, $one(f)$, in pseudocode is:

```go
func(x) {
  return f(x)
}
```

And, $one(f)(x)$ is just `f(x)`. By the way, the idea of $one(f)$, $one(f)(x)$
is [currying][currying], the name for

> the technique of translating a function that takes multiple arguments into a
> sequence of families of functions, each taking a single argument.

[currying]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Currying

With our notations, we can rewrite `add-1` as

$$
\begin{split}
add1(n) &: f \mapsto x \mapsto n(f)(f(x)) \\
          &\equiv f^n(f(x))               \\
          &\equiv f^{n+1}(x)
\end{split}
$$

Then, `plus` is

$$
\begin{split}
plus(a, b)  &: f \mapsto x \mapsto a(f)\Big(b(f)(x)\Big) \\
            &\equiv a(f)(f^b(x))                         \\
            &\equiv f^a(f^b(x))                          \\
            &\equiv f^{a+b}(x)
\end{split}
$$

This notation can also help me to understand the idea of $\lambda$-calculus and
translate them to Lisp code easier. I hope that this will also help you.

### Experiments

To verify our definitions works as expected, we need to be able to execute the
code, turn $one(f)(x)$ into 1. My strategy is to set $x$ to 0 and $f$ to $x+1$.
In code, it looks like this.

```scheme
(define X 0)
(define F (lambda (x) (+ 1 x))
((one F) x)
> 1
```

Run [`./2.6.rkt`](./2.6.rkt) for more demonstrations.

### More arithmetic functions

Let's start with multiplication. We need $f^{a\times b}$. That can be rewritten
as $(f^a)^b$: repeated $f^a$ for $b$ times. Thus, our $mult$ can be defined as:

$$
mult(a, b): f \mapsto x \mapsto b\Big(a(f)\Big)(x)
$$

Let's try to have $square$, i.e. $f^{a^2} = f^a \cdot f^a$, before we attempt to
define $pow$.

$$
\begin{split}
square(a) &: f \mapsto mult(a, a)                        \\
          &\equiv f \mapsto x \mapsto a\Big(a(f)\Big)(x) \\
          &\equiv f \mapsto x \mapsto a^2(f)(x)
\end{split}
$$

It's now easy to see $cube(a)(f) = a(a(a(f))) = a^3(f)$, and $pow$ is:

$$
pow(a, b): f \mapsto x \mapsto b(a)(f)(x)
$$

That's 3 levels of currying!

Now, we get to the tricky parts. Defining any of these poses great challenges in
with our very limited primitives for Church system.

- **Negative**: either $-1$ or `pred` (predecessor, compute $n-1$ from $n$),
  without any of them, we can't have $\mathbb{Z^-}$.
- **Truth**: `true`, `false`.
- **Boolean logic**: `and`, `or`, `not`.
- **Order**: `equal`, `less-than`.
- **Division**. This might _help_, or, _requires_ us to define rational numbers.

From the listed order in Wikipedia [here][lambda-calculus] and
[here][church-encoding], `pred` seems to be the easiest among them. So, I will
try it first.

We have $n$, which is $f^n$, we want $n-1$. How do we nullify the effect of one
$f$ among those $n$ times $f$?

_...(intensively thinking)..._

I picked some hint from wiki, `pred` is only defined for positive number. So, we
can forget the idea that Church encoding, at the current state, can represent
negative numbers. It needs some extension.

Assuming that `pred(zero)` can be `zero` or undefined (throw an error, or crash,
whatever), how to define `pred`?

_...(more intensively thinking)..._

### Understand `pred`

OK, I give up after 2 days of multiple thinking sessions. This is the formula
for `pred` in $\lambda$ notation.

```
PRED := λn.λf.λx.n (λg.λh.h (g f)) (λu.x) (λu.u)
```

Let's demystify how it works using pseudocode.

First, `(λg.λh.h (g f))` is something that

- Takes $g$.
- Create a function that takes $h$, then
- Return $h(g(f))$

Since it swaps the calling order of its chained arguments (take $g$ before $h$,
then apply $g$ before $h$), let's call it $swap$.

```go
func swap(func g){
  return func(func h) {
    return h(g(f))
  }
}
```

The wrapper `()` indicates that `swap` is an anonymous function defined within
the body of `pred`. And the appearance of $f$ means it should have access to
$f$.

Then:

- `λu.x` is a $cons$ function, short for _constant_ always return $x$.
- `λu.u` is an $id$ function, short for _identity,_ always return its argument.

Note that $\lambda$ expression should be read from **left to right**, and
`f a b c` means apply those 3 arguments `a`, `b` and `c` to `f`.

So

```
n (λg.λh.h (g f)) (λu.x) (λu.u)
```

should be read as

$$
n(swap)(const)(id)
$$

`pred` can then be written as:

```go
func pred(func n) {
  return func(func f) {
    return func(any x) {
      func swap(func g){
        return func(func h) {
          return h(g(f))
        }
      }

      func const(any _){ return x }
      func id(any u){ return u }

      v1 := n(swap)
      v2 := v1(const)
      return v2(id)
    }
  }
}
```

At this point, translating above pseudocode to Lisp is trivial. Experiments show
that `pred` works as expected. But how does it work?

By substitution, we will see that

$$
\begin{split}
pred(n) &= n(swap)(const)(id)                                                  \\
  &\equiv swap^n(const)(id)                                                    \\
  &\equiv swap\Big(
      \underbrace{swap^{n-1}(const)}_{g}
    \Big)(
      \underbrace{id}_{h}
    )                                                                          \\
  &\equiv \underbrace{id\Big(swap^{n-1}(const)(f)\Big)}_{
  h(g(f))
  }                                                                            \\
  &\equiv swap^{n-1}(const)(f)                                                 \\
  &\equiv swap\Big(\underbrace{swap^{n-2}(const)}_{g}\Big)(\underbrace{f}_{h}) \\
  &\equiv f(\underbrace{swap^{n-2}(const)(f)}_{h(g(f))})                       \\
  &\equiv f^2(swap^{n-3}(const)(f))                                            \\
  &\equiv f^2(swap^{n-1 - 2}(const)(f))                                        \\
  &\equiv \ldots                                                               \\
  &\equiv f^{n-2}(swap^{n-1 - (n-2)}(const)(f))                                \\
  &\equiv f^{n-2}(swap(const)(f))                                              \\
  &\equiv f^{n-2}(f(const))                                                    \\
  &\equiv f^{n-1}(x)                                                           \\
  &\equiv n-1
\end{split}
\tag{1}
$$

Thus, $pred(n) = n - 1 \forall n \gt 1$. It's not hard to verify that:

- $pred(0) = 0$
- $pred(1) = 0$

So, $pred$ is defined for all non-negative numbers in Church numerals.

[church-encoding]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Church_encoding
[lambda-calculus]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lambda_calculus

### Note

- Originally, I give `(λg.λh.h (g f))` several names (thus, requires above part
  several times): $something$ (don't know its purpose yet), then, $magic$ (can't
  see why it works), finally $swap$ (got it).

- **Notation's readability is really important!**

  It's actually took me a long while to recognize that I had wrongly read those
  expression from right to left. I thought "function takes one argument" means
  `f a b c` is $f(a(b(c)))$.

  I also have a hard time to write the proof $(1)$ using my own notation, due to
  these confusions:

  - Where do we bring up $f$?
  - Which is $g$, which is $h$?

  I hope that you will find the result readable and understandable.

- I heard the term _Church encoding_ as well as $\lambda$-calculus before this
  exercise, from reading about Scala and other functional programming languages.
  However, I hadn't cared about it until now.

  The `pred` expression is truly fucking mind-blowing. Despite knowing how to
  implement it, actually understand how it works is a great challenge (5 levels
  of currying, and indirectly coupled recursive!)

  I attempt to derived $pred$, **knowing that it's possible** using only
  functions, and failed. All

  I can't imagine what was on Church's mind when he designs this system. How did
  he come up with $pred$? How did he know it's possible?

  I'm impressed.
