# Exercise 2.9

The _width_ of an interval is half of the difference between its upper and lower
bounds. The width is a measure of the uncertainty of the number specified by the
interval. For some arithmetic operations the width of the result of combining
two intervals is a function only of the widths of the argument intervals,
whereas for others the width of the combination is not a function of the widths
of the argument intervals. Show that the width of the sum (or difference) of two
intervals is a function only of the widths of the intervals being added (or
subtracted). Give examples to show that this is not true for multiplication or
division.

## Answer

Given 2 intervals $x = [x_1, x_2]$ and $y = [y_1, y_2]$. By definition, we have
the width of those intervals are $w_x=(x_2 - x_1)/2$ and $w_y=(y_2 - y_1)/2$.

Let's say we have a $width$ function that compute the width of an interval.

### Sum and difference

For $x+y$, we will have.

$$
\begin{split}
width(x+y) &= width([x_1+y_1, x_2+y_2])     \\
           &= \frac{x_2+y_2 - (x_1+y_1)}{2} \\
           &= w_x + w_y                     \\
           &= width(x) + width(y)
\end{split}
$$

Similar

$$
\begin{split}
width(x-y) &= width([x_1-y_2, x_2-y_1])     \\
           &= \frac{x_2-y_1 - (x_1-y_2)}{2} \\
           &= \frac{x_2-x_1 + y_2-y_1}{2}   \\
           &= w_x + w_y                     \\
           &= width(x) + width(y)
\end{split}
$$

So, we have the following formula

$$
width(x \pm y) = width(x) + width(y)
$$

### Multiplication and division

Since the division of 2 $x$ and $y$ is defined as

$$
\frac{x}{y} = [x_1, x_2] \times \frac{1}{[y_1, y_2]}
$$

and is a multiplication between 2 intervals itself, we will only need to prove
that width of multiplication is not determined by the widths of $x$ and $y$.

Given

$$
[x_1,x_2]\times[y_1,y_2] = [min(x_1 y_1, x_1 y_2, x_2 y_1, x_2 y_2), max(x_1 y_1, x_1 y_2, x_2 y_1, x_2 y_2)]
$$

So, $width(x \times y)$ is one of these many cases.

$$
width(x\times y) = \frac{1}{2} \cdot
\begin{cases}
x_2 y_2 - x_1 y_1               \\
x_2 y_2 - x_1 y_2 = 2 w_x y_2   \\
x_2 y_2 - x_2 y_1 = 2 w_y x_2   \\
                                \\
x_1 y_2 - x_1 y_1 = 2 x_1 w_y   \\
x_1 y_2 - x_2 y_1               \\
x_1 y_2 - x_2 y_2 = -2 w_x y_2  \\
                                \\
x_2 y_1 - x_1 y_1 = 2 w_x y_1   \\
x_2 y_1 - x_1 y_2               \\
x_2 y_1 - x_2 y_2 = - 2 x_2 w_y \\
                                \\
x_1 y_1 - x_1 y_2 = -2 x_1 w_y  \\
x_1 y_1 - x_2 y_1 = -2 w_x y_1  \\
x_1 y_1 - x_2 y_2               \\
\end{cases}
$$

We can see that the width of multiplications can't be solely computed from just
the widths of $x$ and $y$.
